'\"
'\" Copyright (c) 1996-1997 Sun Microsystems, Inc.
'\"
'\" See the file "license.terms" for information on usage and redistribution
'\" of this file, and for a DISCLAIMER OF ALL WARRANTIES.
'\" 
'\" RCS: @(#) Id
'\" 
.so man.macros
.TH Tcl_IntObj 3 8.0 Tcl "Tcl Library Procedures"
.BS
.SH NAME
Tcl_NewIntObj, Tcl_NewLongObj, Tcl_NewWideIntObj, Tcl_SetIntObj, Tcl_SetLongObj, Tcl_SetWideIntObj, Tcl_GetIntFromObj, Tcl_GetLongFromObj, Tcl_GetWideIntFromObj \- manipulate Tcl objects as integers and wide integers
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tcl.h>\fR
.sp
Tcl_Obj *
\fBTcl_NewIntObj\fR(\fIintValue\fR)
.sp
Tcl_Obj *
\fBTcl_NewLongObj\fR(\fIlongValue\fR)
.sp
.VS 8.4
Tcl_Obj *
\fBTcl_NewWideIntObj\fR(\fIwideValue\fR)
.VE 8.4
.sp
\fBTcl_SetIntObj\fR(\fIobjPtr, intValue\fR)
.sp
\fBTcl_SetLongObj\fR(\fIobjPtr, longValue\fR)
.sp
.VS 8.4
\fBTcl_SetWideIntObj\fR(\fIobjPtr, wideValue\fR)
.VE 8.4
.sp
int
\fBTcl_GetIntFromObj\fR(\fIinterp, objPtr, intPtr\fR)
.sp
int
\fBTcl_GetLongFromObj\fR(\fIinterp, objPtr, longPtr\fR)
.sp
.VS 8.4
int
\fBTcl_GetWideIntFromObj\fR(\fIinterp, objPtr, widePtr\fR)
.VE 8.4
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS Tcl_WideInt *interp
.AP int intValue in
Integer value used to initialize or set an integer object.
.AP long longValue in
Long integer value used to initialize or set an integer object.
.AP Tcl_WideInt wideValue in
.VS 8.4
Wide integer value (minimum 64-bits wide where supported by the
compiler) used to initialize or set a wide integer object.
.VE 8.4
.AP Tcl_Obj *objPtr in/out
For \fBTcl_SetIntObj\fR, \fBTcl_SetLongObj\fR, and
.VS 8.4
\fBTcl_SetWideIntObj\fR, this points to the object to be converted to
integer type.  For \fBTcl_GetIntFromObj\fR, \fBTcl_GetLongFromObj\fR,
and \fBTcl_GetWideIntFromObj\fR, this refers to the object from which
to get an integer or long integer value; if \fIobjPtr\fR does not
already point to an integer object (or a wide integer object in the
case of \fBTcl_SetWideIntObj\fR and \fBTcl_GetWideIntFromObj\fR,) an
.VE 8.4
attempt will be made to convert it to one.
.AP Tcl_Interp *interp in/out
If an error occurs during conversion,
an error message is left in the interpreter's result object
unless \fIinterp\fR is NULL.
.AP int *intPtr out
Points to place to store the integer value
obtained by \fBTcl_GetIntFromObj\fR from \fIobjPtr\fR.
.AP long *longPtr out
Points to place to store the long integer value
obtained by \fBTcl_GetLongFromObj\fR from \fIobjPtr\fR.
.AP Tcl_WideInt *widePtr out
.VS 8.4
Points to place to store the wide integer value
obtained by \fBTcl_GetWideIntFromObj\fR from \fIobjPtr\fR.
.VE 8.4
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
These procedures are used to create, modify, and read
integer and wide integer Tcl objects from C code.
\fBTcl_NewIntObj\fR, \fBTcl_NewLongObj\fR,
\fBTcl_SetIntObj\fR, and \fBTcl_SetLongObj\fR
create a new object of integer type
or modify an existing object to have integer type,
.VS 8.4
and \fBTcl_NewWideIntObj\fR and \fBTcl_SetWideIntObj\fR create a new
object of wide integer type or modify an existing object to have wide
integer type. 
.VE 8.4
\fBTcl_NewIntObj\fR and \fBTcl_SetIntObj\fR set the object to have the
integer value given by \fIintValue\fR,
\fBTcl_NewLongObj\fR and \fBTcl_SetLongObj\fR
set the object to have the
long integer value given by \fIlongValue\fR,
.VS 8.4
and \fBTcl_NewWideIntObj\fR and \fBTcl_SetWideIntObj\fR set the object
to have the wide integer value given by \fIwideValue\fR.
\fBTcl_NewIntObj\fR, \fBTcl_NewLongObj\fR and \fBTcl_NewWideIntObj\fR
return a pointer to a newly created object with reference count zero.
These procedures set the object's type to be integer
and assign the integer value to the object's internal representation
\fIlongValue\fR or \fIwideValue\fR member (as appropriate).
\fBTcl_SetIntObj\fR, \fBTcl_SetLongObj\fR
and \fBTcl_SetWideIntObj\fR
.VE 8.4
invalidate any old string representation and,
if the object is not already an integer object,
free any old internal representation.
.PP
\fBTcl_GetIntFromObj\fR and \fBTcl_GetLongFromObj\fR
attempt to return an integer value from the Tcl object \fIobjPtr\fR,
.VS 8.4
and \fBTcl_GetWideIntFromObj\fR attempts to return a wide integer
value from the Tcl object \fIobjPtr\fR.
If the object is not already an integer object,
or a wide integer object in the case of \fBTcl_GetWideIntFromObj\fR
.VE 8.4
they will attempt to convert it to one.
If an error occurs during conversion, they return \fBTCL_ERROR\fR
and leave an error message in the interpreter's result object
unless \fIinterp\fR is NULL.
Also, if the long integer held in the object's internal representation
\fIlongValue\fR member can not be represented in a (non-long) integer,
\fBTcl_GetIntFromObj\fR returns \fBTCL_ERROR\fR
and leaves an error message in the interpreter's result object
unless \fIinterp\fR is NULL.
Otherwise, all three procedures return \fBTCL_OK\fR and
store the integer, long integer value
.VS 8.4
or wide integer in the address given by \fIintPtr\fR, \fIlongPtr\fR
and \fIwidePtr\fR
.VE 8.4
respectively.  If the object is not already an integer or wide integer
object, the conversion will free any old internal representation.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
Tcl_NewObj, Tcl_DecrRefCount, Tcl_IncrRefCount, Tcl_GetObjResult

.SH KEYWORDS
integer, integer object, integer type, internal representation, object, object type, string representation
