'\"
'\" Copyright (c) 1989-1993 The Regents of the University of California.
'\" Copyright (c) 1994-1996 Sun Microsystems, Inc.
'\"
'\" See the file "license.terms" for information on usage and redistribution
'\" of this file, and for a DISCLAIMER OF ALL WARRANTIES.
'\" 
'\" RCS: @(#) Id
'\" 
.so man.macros
.TH Tcl_StringMatch 3 8.1 Tcl "Tcl Library Procedures"
.BS
.SH NAME
Tcl_StringMatch, Tcl_StringCaseMatch \- test whether a string matches a pattern
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tcl.h>\fR
.sp
int
\fBTcl_StringMatch\fR(\fIstring\fR, \fIpattern\fR)
.VS 8.1
.sp
\fBTcl_StringCaseMatch\fR(\fIstring, pattern, nocase\fR)
.VE 8.1
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AP char *string in
String to test.
.AP char *pattern in
Pattern to match against string.  May contain special
characters from the set *?\e[].
.VS 8.1
.AP int nocase in
Specifies whether the match should be done case-sensitive (0) or
case-insensitive (1).
.VE 8.1
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
This utility procedure determines whether a string matches
a given pattern.  If it does, then \fBTcl_StringMatch\fR returns
1.  Otherwise \fBTcl_StringMatch\fR returns 0.  The algorithm
used for matching is the same algorithm used in the ``string match''
Tcl command and is similar to the algorithm used by the C-shell
for file name matching;  see the Tcl manual entry for details.
.VS 8.1
.PP
In \fBTcl_StringCaseMatch\fR, the algorithm is the same, but you have
the option to make the matching case-insensitive.  If you choose this
(by passing \fBnocase\fR as 1), then the string and pattern are
essentially matched in the lower case.
.VE 8.1

.SH KEYWORDS
match, pattern, string
