'\"
'\" Copyright (c) 1998-2000 by Scriptics Corporation.
'\" All rights reserved.
'\" 
'\" RCS: @(#) Id
'\" 
'\"
.so man.macros
.TH Tk_AddOption 3 "" Tk "Tk Library Procedures"
.BS
.SH NAME
Tk_AddOption \- Add an option to the option database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tk.h>\fR
.sp
void
\fBTk_AddOption\fR(\fItkwin, name, value, priority\fR)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AP Tk_Window tkwin in
Token for window.
.AP "CONST char" *name in
Multi-element name of option.
.AP "CONST char" *value in
Value of option.
.AP int priority in
Overall priority level to use for option.
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
This procedure is invoked to add an option to the database
associated with \fItkwin\fR's main window.  \fIName\fR
contains the option being specified and consists of names and/or
classes separated by asterisks or dots, in the usual X format.
\fIValue\fR contains the text string to associate with \fIname\fR;
this value will be returned in calls to \fBTk_GetOption\fR.
\fIPriority\fR specifies the priority of the value; when options are
queried using \fBTk_GetOption\fR, the value with the highest priority
is returned.  \fIPriority\fR must be between 0 and TK_MAX_PRIO.  Some
common priority values are:
.TP
20
Used for default values hard-coded into widgets.
.TP
40
Used for options specified in application-specific startup files.
.TP
60
Used for options specified in user-specific defaults files, such as
\fB.Xdefaults\fR, resource databases loaded into the X server, or
user-specific startup files.
.TP
80
Used for options specified interactively after the application starts
running.
.PP

.SH KEYWORDS
class, name, option, add
