'\"
'\" Copyright (c) 1990-1994 The Regents of the University of California.
'\" Copyright (c) 1994-1998 Sun Microsystems, Inc.
'\"
'\" See the file "license.terms" for information on usage and redistribution
'\" of this file, and for a DISCLAIMER OF ALL WARRANTIES.
'\" 
'\" RCS: @(#) Id
'\" 
.so man.macros
.TH Tk_GetJustifyFromObj 3 8.1 Tk "Tk Library Procedures"
.BS
.SH NAME
Tk_GetJustifyFromObj, Tk_GetJustify, Tk_NameOfJustify \- translate between strings and justification styles
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tk.h>\fR
.sp
.VS 8.1
int
\fBTk_GetJustifyFromObj(\fIinterp, objPtr, justifyPtr\fB)\fR
.sp
int
\fBTk_GetJustify(\fIinterp, string, justifyPtr\fB)\fR
.sp
char *
\fBTk_NameOfJustify(\fIjustify\fB)\fR
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS "Tk_Justify" *justifyPtr
.AP Tcl_Interp *interp in
Interpreter to use for error reporting, or NULL.
.VS 8.1 br
.AP Tcl_Obj *objPtr in/out
String value contains name of justification style (\fBleft\fR, \fBright\fR, or
\fBcenter\fR).  The
internal rep will be modified to cache corresponding justify value.
.AP char *string in
Same as \fIobjPtr\fR except description of justification style is passed as
a string.
.VE
.AP int *justifyPtr out
Pointer to location in which to store justify value corresponding to
\fIobjPtr\fR or \fIstring\fR.
.AP Tk_Justify justify in
Justification style (one of the values listed below).
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.VS 8.1
\fBTk_GetJustifyFromObj\fR places in \fI*justifyPtr\fR the justify value
corresponding to \fIobjPtr\fR's value.
.VE
This value will be one of the following:
.TP
\fBTK_JUSTIFY_LEFT\fR
Means that the text on each line should start at the left edge of
the line;  as a result, the right edges of lines may be ragged.
.TP
\fBTK_JUSTIFY_RIGHT\fR
Means that the text on each line should end at the right edge of
the line;  as a result, the left edges of lines may be ragged.
.TP
\fBTK_JUSTIFY_CENTER\fR
Means that the text on each line should be centered;  as a result,
both the left and right edges of lines may be ragged.
.PP
.VS 8.1
Under normal circumstances the return value is \fBTCL_OK\fR and
\fIinterp\fR is unused.
If \fIobjPtr\fR doesn't contain a valid justification style
or an abbreviation of one of these names, \fBTCL_ERROR\fR is returned,
\fI*justifyPtr\fR is unmodified, and an error message is
stored in \fIinterp\fR's result if \fIinterp\fR isn't NULL.
\fBTk_GetJustifyFromObj\fR caches information about the return
value in \fIobjPtr\fR, which speeds up future calls to
\fBTk_GetJustifyFromObj\fR with the same \fIobjPtr\fR.
.PP
\fBTk_GetJustify\fR is identical to \fBTk_GetJustifyFromObj\fR except
that the description of the justification is specified with a string instead
of an object.  This prevents \fBTk_GetJustify\fR from caching the
return value, so \fBTk_GetJustify\fR is less efficient than
\fBTk_GetJustifyFromObj\fR.
.VE
.PP
\fBTk_NameOfJustify\fR is the logical inverse of \fBTk_GetJustify\fR.
Given a justify value it returns a statically-allocated string
corresponding to \fIjustify\fR.
If \fIjustify\fR isn't a legal justify value, then
``unknown justification style'' is returned.

.SH KEYWORDS
center, fill, justification, string
