'\"
'\" Copyright (c) 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
'\" Copyright (c) 1994-1998 Sun Microsystems, Inc.
'\"
'\" See the file "license.terms" for information on usage and redistribution
'\" of this file, and for a DISCLAIMER OF ALL WARRANTIES.
'\" 
'\" RCS: @(#) Id
'\" 
.so man.macros
.TH Tk_GetReliefFromObj 3 8.1 Tk "Tk Library Procedures"
.BS
.SH NAME
Tk_GetReliefFromObj, Tk_GetRelief, Tk_NameOfRelief \- translate between strings and relief values
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tk.h>\fR
.sp
.VS 8.1
int
\fBTk_GetReliefFromObj(\fIinterp, objPtr, reliefPtr\fB)\fR
.VE
.sp
int
\fBTk_GetRelief(\fIinterp, name, reliefPtr\fB)\fR
.sp
char *
\fBTk_NameOfRelief(\fIrelief\fB)\fR
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS "Tcl_Interp" *reliefPtr
.AP Tcl_Interp *interp in
Interpreter to use for error reporting.
.VS 8.1 br
.AP Tcl_Obj *objPtr in/out
String value contains name of relief (one of \fBflat\fR, \fBgroove\fR,
\fBraised\fR, \fBridge\fR, \fBsolid\fR, or \fBsunken\fR);
internal rep will be modified to cache corresponding relief value.
.AP char *string in
Same as \fIobjPtr\fR except description of relief is passed as
a string.
.VE
.AP int *reliefPtr out
Pointer to location in which to store relief value corresponding to
\fIobjPtr\fR or \fIname\fR.
.AP int relief in
Relief value (one of TK_RELIEF_FLAT, TK_RELIEF_RAISED, TK_RELIEF_SUNKEN,
TK_RELIEF_GROOVE, TK_RELIEF_SOLID, or TK_RELIEF_RIDGE).
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.VS 8.1
\fBTk_GetReliefFromObj\fR places in \fI*reliefPtr\fR the relief value
corresponding to the value of \fIobjPtr\fR.  This value will be one of
TK_RELIEF_FLAT, TK_RELIEF_RAISED, TK_RELIEF_SUNKEN,
TK_RELIEF_GROOVE, TK_RELIEF_SOLID, or TK_RELIEF_RIDGE.
Under normal circumstances the return value is TCL_OK and
\fIinterp\fR is unused.
If \fIobjPtr\fR doesn't contain one of the valid relief names
or an abbreviation of one of them, then TCL_ERROR is returned,
\fI*reliefPtr\fR is unmodified, and an error message
is stored in \fIinterp\fR's result if \fIinterp\fR isn't NULL.
\fBTk_GetReliefFromObj\fR caches information about the return
value in \fIobjPtr\fR, which speeds up future calls to
\fBTk_GetReliefFromObj\fR with the same \fIobjPtr\fR.
.PP
\fBTk_GetRelief\fR is identical to \fBTk_GetReliefFromObj\fR except
that the description of the relief is specified with a string instead
of an object.  This prevents \fBTk_GetRelief\fR from caching the
return value, so \fBTk_GetRelief\fR is less efficient than
\fBTk_GetReliefFromObj\fR.
.VE
.PP
\fBTk_NameOfRelief\fR is the logical inverse of \fBTk_GetRelief\fR.
Given a relief value it returns the corresponding string (\fBflat\fR,
\fBraised\fR, \fBsunken\fR, \fBgroove\fR, \fBsolid\fR, or \fBridge\fR).
If \fIrelief\fR isn't a legal relief value, then ``unknown relief''
is returned.

.SH KEYWORDS
name, relief, string
